---
layout: post
title: "A case for modding"
description: ""
category: post
tags: []
---

As I write this, I am wearing a modified Casio F-91 watch created by
the group Dexter Sinister. Physically, it is the same classic watch
manufactured by Casio but runs slightly modified software for
displaying the time and handing button inputs. Unlike most 'mods' this
doesn't enhance the capabilities of the watch at all. It removes the
stop watch feature, makes the battery run out about 10x sooner and is
more difficult to actually tell the time. This meant to be more of an
art piece than some practical improvement, but I have to say, it feels
magical.

I grew up on modded video game systems, after first enhancing my Sega
Genesis with a "32x" - allowing for enhanced graphics. Later modified
a friend's dreamcast to allow for playing games downloaded and burned
onto CDs. These physical modifications are costly, as you both have to
own the original device and the new device - and have the knowledge of
how to assemble the two - certainly a filter for some. Today, in our
world of screens, such modifications have almost entirely
disappeared. You download an app, or customize the parameters of a
pre-defined theme. The lineage of these game system mods is
"jailbreaking" your mobile phone - giving you access to tune the
processor or install applications with no restrictions from the
manufacturer. In all honestly, these modifications, while convenient,
are not particularly transformative.

The most important thing about modding is that we no longer see a
product on a shelf as "final". It is a tool that we can use with other
tools to better suit our needs. Our tools are not those of
manufacturers, elaborate welding techniques or gorilla glass, but the
entire wealth of mass produced products. Buy over focusing on creating
the next great app, we have forgotten that we use many devices other
than computers a mobile phones. Software modding, should both not be
restricted to phones and should not kill hardware modding. We should
learn to think creatively, and artistically, not with sticks and
stones but buy using the tools of our new world - modifying a great
coffee maker to brew tea, combining a Bluetooth headset and a garage
door opener, creating a tape that can play mp3s. The opportunities are
endless and the results are magical.
