---
layout: post
title: "Learning from failure"
description: ""
category: post
tags: []
---

"Build something that people want" | "Chase the vision, not the money;
the money will end up following you." | "Donâ€™t worry about failure; you
only have to be right once." |"Any time is a good time to start a
company." | "The way to get started is to quit talking and start
doing." | "Trust your instincts." | "Never, never, never give up." |
"I'm convinced that about half of what separates the successful
entrepreneurs from the non-successful ones is pure perseverance."

These quotes are all pretty useless. This blog post is about some
platitudes that have taken on some real meaning for me through
experience and now provide a framework for future projects.

## Always be incremental

Once, I started fundraising for a project a friend and I had been
working on for a couple years. It seemed like a great idea to launch
alongside some windfall press. The timing was almost right in that we
did have a functioning website, a system that mostly worked, and a
kickstarter project ready to go for funding the whole thing...but each
of these items was far from good. The other factor is that I was
running out of money. I had been living off of unemployment for a
couple years and that was due to run out in about two months. I was
unsure if we could both make the project more substantial, and then
run the project in that time -- or if I should spend that time looking
for a job. The press looked like a shortcut, and was in the wake of
Diaspora getting funded, so we vastly overvalued this press
opportunity and decided to launch in order to capitalize on it. The
fundraising failed.

Regardless of the success of that kickstarter, the broader project was
not in a position to succeed. We did not clearly understand what would
make our product useful to people, possess the skills to productize it
and were too wrapped up in the project to realize it. Though certainly
we could have acted in a riskier way and really fought for its
survival, we rushed to put out a bad project and the project was
rightfully unsuccessful. When the funraising failed it didn't feel
like we had failed, since we had already failed well before that by
not getting people to use our product.

As a small team, we had a big app. The tech world is full of grand
visions, but you are not going to build something to "radically
transform" people's lives. People don't want their lives "radically
transformed" -- they want them to be a little bit better. You may have
a large long term plan but the first step is the most challenging -
getting someone to love something you build. Keep it simple and
incremental when improving the product, but also think about how your
product can be seen as an increment on to a real person's real life.

## Build something that people can understand and want

This same project we created were fundraising for, was also a research
project in the HCI community. A research project is very different
from a 'real life' project. HCI is a truly wonderful community and
honestly the most thoughtful and welcoming group I have ever been a
part of. That said, I can't help but think the focus on creating
publishable results hinders your ability to create immediately useful
results. While trying to glean something generalize-able and
scientifically valid, you often miss or ignore feedback that would
help you create a useful product. While we asked many great research
questions, the bigger question we failed to ask 'is this something
that people both understand and want'.

There is something to be said for Amazon's 'Press Release Driven
Development'. Many mere panels of our large system are now million
dollar companies. For example, our system for creating rules such as
"when I get an email that contains urgent, text me that email" is a
natural language version of [IFFT](https://ifttt.com/). We had a
calendaring system for displaying context around your upcoming
calendar events - not unlike
[Fantastical](https://flexibits.com/fantastical). The part I was most
excited about, a way to view a summary of your past, still is a nitche
that has not been filled. A system encompassing all of these things,
particularly before there were popular existing tools to relate them
to, was just too much for someone to understand and want. Maybe even
more importantly, it was something so large it was difficult to make
any part of it truly great - and the project as a whole, something
that we could be proud of.

## Build something that you are proud of

After the research project I worked on ended, I went to be an early
engineer and designer at a very new tech company in NYC. In less than
a year it had dissolved. The saddest thing about is that I believe we
were addressing an important need but produced a product that was less
than the talent in the room. The quality of the final project wasn't
there and it failed to address the business needs. There were many
simple process that could have been put in place to create an
environment where we more intelligently reacted to business needs
and created a more desirable product.

In a startup it is easy to get caught up in the race. We lacked the
perspective to slow the hell down and ask what we were building. My
one wish is that we just took not just a day but weeks to stop
building and just think about if what we want to do mapped to what we
were actually doing. A vision is nothing, if it doesn't map
to what you are actually doing.

My primary error was not clearly delegating and organizing my
responsibilities. I took on too much, as the designer, only front-end
engineer and, later, really only 'product person' although really
everyone was heavily involved in the project, it lacked an involved
leader. It was impossible for me to do a half good job at any of these
things and I should have more clearly communicated that.

## Learning from Failure

It seems so simple, but each of these projects failed when we got
tired. We were just exhausted from working on these problems for years
without seeing signs of 'success'. I am sure that with enough energy
and time, we could have made these projects financially successful and
something that we could be proud of. They are all projects that could
be at least be a well made project that financially supports a small team.

While each of these platitudes are great, the bigger issue is managing
you, and the team's energy. Life is short, people get tired. We all
run in the wrong direction for a while but we can only do it for so
long.
